---
published: true
title: A love letter
layout: post
---

Those who know me well know that, when it comes to food, I'm a man of simple
tastes. Pasta is best served with a smooth marinara. Loaded fries, for me,
shall not be more than fried potatoes with a generous helping of Heinz catsup.
Any pizza that deviates from the Neapolitan margherita ideal (tomato sauce and
mozzarella) is a form of blasphemy.

But there's another dish that captivates me. It is a remarkable dish that, when
consumed, sends me into a daze. When this dish enters my sights, my heart races
with excitement and anticipation. It's a simple meal, consisting of two main
components and only two significant ingredients, but its a meal that turns me
from a wretched, starved beast, to a glowing man again, enlightened and
invigorated.

This magical meal is daal chawal, served exclusively at [Aunty's
Kitchen](http://www.auntyskitchen.ca). It is lentil soup with a side of rice.

The daal (lentil soup) is a golden elixir that explodes with taste --
hot spice, garlic, cumin, and secret flavours which will taunt me for as long as
I live. This daal is a sublime potion; highly satisfying and obscenely
comforting. It lifts me into a state of serene ecstasy.

Even the rice, whose individual grains alternate colours on a gradient from a
dark cream to carrot orange, is infused with hints of flavour arising from
cumin, cloves, peppercorn, and again the unachievable <i>je ne sais quoi</i>
that makes this rice both irreplaceable and irreplicable.

When I've eaten a plate of Aunty's daal chawal, I'm miserable that the
experience is over. But each time I complete the meal I'm sated, and my appetite
has been fully attended to. And even though the value I extract from this dish
is virtually priceless, the cost of this optimal meal is just around $6.50 CAD.

I'm known amongst the virtuous apprentices who staff Aunty's Kitchen as "that
guy who gets daal all the time", and that's a badge I wear with honour. I
anticipate being a highly regular patron of Aunty's for as long as I reside in
Kitchener-Waterloo (and if I move away, it might be the thing I miss most).

But dear Aunty's Kitchen -- I plead one thing of you. You and your noble staff
have outdone yourself when it comes to this daal. But I'm convinced your chefs
possess a Midas touch. I beg you to expand your vegetarian offerings! I've
already seen what you can do with a chana masala, and my God, it is beautiful.
Why must you limit it to a Thursday special?! And yes, I know you serve shahi
paneer, but I'm trying to avoid cheese, I apologize!

Oh, what am I saying -- I could never stay mad at you, Aunty's Kitchen. But
please, one thing: if I ever succumb to my hidden desires, to on some dark day,
request you to connect an intravenous line to my body, providing me with a
constant stream of daal -- please say no, regardless of the profits you might
see. Clearly it is the wrong decision for me (it would not come with a side of
rice).
